If you've spent any time around computers
you've almost certainly heard the term
garbage in, garbage out.
Meaning that the quality of your outputs
is only as good as the quality of your
inputs.
This principle absolutely applies
when we talk about data analytics.
Your ability to execute an analysis and
have confidence in the results has a huge
dependence on the overall
quality of the data you use.
However, data quality can be
a pretty tricky thing to manage.
And usually requires a fairly relentless
focus on preventing, detecting and
remediating issues.
In this video we'll take
a closer look at data quality.
First, we'll try to define what data
quality is, then we'll discuss how data
quality can be managed at each
point in the data life cycle.
So what exactly is data quality?
There are two over arching
definitions that we might apply.
The first, and the one you see
in most technical articles or
standards documents, is the fitness for
use or meets requirements definition.
This definition basically says the data
quality is the degree to which data can be
used for its intended purpose.
The second definition is a bit
more philosophical and suggests
that data quality is the degree to which
data accurately represents the real world.
If you've been paying
attention in this course,
you know how fond we are of understanding
what is happening in the real world, so
we really like that definition.
However, in the real world you
also have to get things done.
So we think there's a lot of value
to the first definition as well.
The good news is,
we really don't have to choose.
We can do our best to make our data as
representative of the real world as
practical.
And we can decide when we've gotten close
enough that the decisions we make and
the actions we take are sound ones.
We can also add a bit more
detail around what it means for
data to be of high quality.
There are few characteristics that
generally help to define good data.
The first is completeness or
a measure of whether or
not we have all the data
we expect to have.
Are we capturing all events
we should be capturing?
When we capture an event,
do we have all the attributes of
that event that we expect to have?
If we use reference data,
are all the values in that
reference data accounted for?
A related idea is uniqueness, which is
basically the opposite of completeness.
For example, if I record one event,
am I sure I've recorded it only once and
not multiple times?
A second idea is accuracy, a measure of
whether the data we have is an accurate
representative of the idea
it's trying to capture.
If the data point is a number,
is it the right number?
If it's a string, is it the right
string and is it spelled correctly?
Are timestamps and
other attributes correctly captured?
The concept of consistency
is an extension of accuracy.
Do I capture the same data
the same way every time?
Or if I capture it in two different
places, do I have the same values?
A third measure is what we might
call conformance or validity.
Whether stored data conforms to syntax and
coding and
other specifications of a data model.
Is data stored in the correct format?
If codes are used for attributes,
are they the expected codes?
Are pieces of data named using the
conventions that have been established for
a system or database?
A fourth measure is timeliness, which
speaks to whether data is captured or
made available soon enough after a real
world event for it to be useful.
You might hear the term data latency
to describe how long it takes for
data to be available for
something like reporting or analytics.
For example, if you need to
make a same day decision and
the data isn't available until the next
day, the data is of low usefulness for
that purpose, and of low quality
per our fitness for use definition.
The fifth and
final measure we'll include is prominence,
which is the degree to which we have
visibility into the origins of the data.
This is kind of a second-order measure,
but speaks to how much confidence we have
that the data we're looking at is real and
is accurate.
It makes sense that if I'm somehow
able to measure each of these
characteristics of my data, I'll get a
pretty good idea of how good that data is.
So let's talk a little bit more about how
and where we might take these measures and
what things we might do
to manage data equality.
It's useful to bring back
the first part of the information
action value chain we discussed in module
one, which you may recall looks like this.
We start with events and characteristics
in the real world, capture data in source
systems, store data, extract data,
and execute our analysis.
We can also look at this framework from
more of a systems point of view like this.
Here you can see a series of steps for
how data moves through our systems.
We capture data in our source systems
using some set of automated or
manual processes.
We then take that data and drive it to
the storage location using extract,
transform and load operations,
or other similar mechanisms.
We then extract the data from storage for
use in reports and analytics using SQL or
some set of business intelligence tools.
We started this video by talking about
the idea of garbage in, garbage out.
The most effective way to address
data quality issues is to
prevent them from ever
happening in the first place
by controlling by how data
is captured at the source.
How we do this depends on exactly
how the data is captured.
One of the biggest drivers of bad data are
errors introduced via manual data entry by
people, whether their customers, other
outside partners or our own employees.
To help minimize these types of
errors organizations might build
in validation mechanisms or auto
populate certain pieces of information.
For example, an online form might force
you to enter a valid phone number in
a specific format, make you use a dropdown
box to choose the state where you live, or
even prepopulate your city based
on the ZIP code you enter.
It also might not let you submit or
proceed unless all the require
fields are filled in.
Generally speaking, the less information
that is typed into free-form fields,
the higher the quality
of the data will be.
Other capture mechanisms might be driven
by the design of the source system itself.
Sometimes there are bugs in source
applications that result in bad data.
In these cases the best solution
is to find the bugs and fix them.
In both cases we seek to improve data
quality from preventing it from the start.
However, even the best data capture
mechanisms aren't perfect, and
it's inevitable that some bad data
will make it into the source system.
If we're smart, we can still try and
catch it before it makes its way
downstream to other systems.
The way we do this is with some
set of automated checks that run
against the data within a source system.
And look for one or more of the quality
characteristics we discussed ealier.
In some cases it maybe possible
to automatically correct data or
fill in missing values.
In other cases, errors can be flagged and
picked up by some remediation or
maintenance process.
Again, catching issues early
is almost always better, but
it's not always possible.
Our next opportunity to enforce
quality is in the process
used to bring data into a common location,
usually a database of some sort.
There are a couple things we
typically do in ETL processes or
other data loading operations
that help with quality.
First, we applied what's
called audit balance and
control operations to our jobs.
These operations is generally
make sure that transfer processes
itself happens as intended.
And that we don't actually introduced
data quality problems as those jobs run.
There's a lot of different ways
these operations can be set up but
usually they involve constructing summary
metrics on both sides of the transfer and
ensuring that they balance.
Secondly, we can actually write ETL code
in such a way that data is standardized,
forced into a common format, or
even filled in using reference
information as it's loaded.
We can even take this to step further and
enforce what's called referential
integrity in our database.
Which basically means that all reference
data contained in data records must have
known values and related reference tables.
This help's ensure that no unknown
attribute values can enter the database.
Of course it's also a good idea
to set some sort of flag or
alert when an unknown values
is observed and filtered out.
Despite our best efforts,
it's still possible that data has
made it's way into our database.
Or worse yet,
that we somehow introduce some errors
in moving it from one place to another.
Just like we did in our source systems,
we can set up ordinate checks for data
quality characteristics for our database,
but there are couple of differences.
First, because I'm potentially
getting data from multiple places and
because I may stored for a lot longer on
my database, I may be able to use some of
that other data to make sense of what I'm
seeing from one particular source system.
This allows my data quality checks
to be a bit more sophisticated.
And it's not uncommon to see statistical
techniques like those used in statistical
process control to detect and alert when a
metric has exceeded some normal threshold.
On the other hand, because more steps have
happened between the event itself and
the data in my database,
my checks may not be as precise at
telling me exactly where the problem is.
I may need to backtrack through
the source system to isolate the issue.
Now, if we've done a good job we should
catch the vast majority of issues
long before they end up in
a downstream report or analysis.
However, something will
inevitably slip through, and
every time we manipulate data we
have the potential for new errors.
It turns out that we can implement checks
similar to those we've discussed at each
downstream step in the process,
including our reporting and analytics.
At the end of the line is what
we might call the eyeball check.
The person reviewing a report or
interpreting analysis needs to know enough
about the business to recognize
when data looks fishy.
While we certainly don't want to rely
on that to catch quality issues,
it is the method of last resort.
So given all the options we have for
where we execute data quality, the
question becomes, which ones do we use?
The answer is simple, all of them.
The best data quality programs use a multi
faceted approach that puts quality
controls at every step of the process.
They also integrate these checks into
a larger coordinated process that ensures
data quality issues are fully investigated
and remediated by the correct team.
This is one reason why data quality is
often integrated into an organization's
larger data governance process.
This way,
the same accountability structures and
communication mechanisms can be leveraged
to identify and resolve issues.
As an analyst you have an important
role to play in data quality.
In addition to being one of those
performing the eye ball check,
you will be spending a lot of
time pouring through the data.
And you'll almost certainly come across
something that doesn't look like
from time to time.
When you do, take the initiative and
get it resolved using whatever structures
are present in your organization.
Let's quickly recap what
we've learned today.
We defined data quality
from both a fitness for
use and
real world representation perspective.
We then introduced a number
of data quality measures,
including completeness and uniqueness,
accuracy and consistency, conformance and
validity, timeliness, and prominence.
Finally, we stepped through the path that
data takes on its way from the real world
to analysis and
described the types of data quality
measures that can be taken at each step.
Including how those
collective measures can and
should be integrated into
a larger data quality process.
So long for now but may the balance
of quality always be in your favor.